The association between creativity and bipolar illness is an age-old controversy.
2
Bipolar illness is characterized by pronounced mood swings—alternating periods of elation, normalcy, and despondency, which can be accompanied by hallucinations or delusions during the peaks and troughs of the cycles. Although we might expect bipolar illness to hamper occupational and artistic achievement, the creativity and energy characteristic of persons with mania may actually improve some aspects of their labor market outcomes (Frank and McGuire, 2000).
Estimates of prevalence of bipolar illness fall around 1.2% of the population (Weissman et al., 1991).
3
With respect to the labor market, the employment of the bipolar population is approximately 71% compared to about 82% for the general population, and those with bipolar illness earn about 57% of the earnings of others, all else equal (Ettner et al., 1997). In contrast to poorer employment and earnings outcomes in the Ettner et al. (1997) study, Marcotte et al. (2000) find that bipolar status in the past year does not significantly affect income or employment for men or women, but that length of time with a bipolar disorder positively and significantly affects employment for women. Further, the lifetime number of bipolar episodes appears to significantly increase income for men. These mixed findings for the bipolar population suggest a need for further study.
None of the economic studies to date have addressed the issue of occupational outcomes for those with bipolar illnesses. Yet there is a substantial body of research on the possible link between creative and artistic occupations and bipolar illness in the medical and behavioral sciences literature. About 75% of these studies find evidence of such a link (Jamison, 1993). Much of this research derives from case studies, biographies of prominent historical figures in the arts, or diagnostic and psychological studies of living writers, artists, and composers. Although rich and informative in their own right, these studies suffer from small sample sizes or from selection bias. In contrast to the case study approach, we employ a population based data set to contribute to the literature on bipolar disorder and creativity as well as the labor market literature on occupational outcomes.
The clinical definition of mania may help in understanding the link between bipolar illness and creativity. Depression characterizes both unipolar and bipolar illness; thus it is an episode of mania that distinguishes bipolar illness (or bipolar I disorder) from unipolar illness. Generally speaking, a manic episode entails “a distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive or irritable mood,” which may alternate with depressive mood. A manic episode is characterized by at least three of the following symptoms: increased activity, talkativeness, flight of ideas, inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and excessive involvement in risky activities. Some of these symptoms encourage creativity, for example “flight of ideas” and “talkativeness” (which might facilitate rhyming and verse). Increased activity and decreased need for sleep may bolster productivity in a number of occupations.
Another explanation is that there may be a genetic tie between bipolar disorder and creativity. Richards et al. (1988) find that unafflicted close relatives of bipolar patients tend to be more creative than the general population. In addition, Kèri (2009) studied the genomic DNA of 200 healthy, high intellectual achievement individuals, and found that those who carried a genotype related to psychosis risk had the highest creativity levels.
4
Some evolutionary psychologists argue that the positive benefits of creativity might account for the persistence of bipolar disorder in the gene pool in spite of the negative aspects of the illness, although there appears to be some controversy over the reasons for that persistence (Keller and Miller, 2006, Miller and Tal, 2007). It may be that the genetic complexities of mental illness have prevented its elimination by natural selection. For example, individual genes contributing to mental illness may not be harmful alone and may tie to creativity, but when in combination with other genes result in mental illness.
We do not presume to disentangle potential causal factors, but attempt to establish whether or not there is an association between bipolar illness and occupational creativity. Unlike prior studies, we bring a different kind of data, traditional methods from labor economics, as well as nonparametric statistical techniques to bear on this question. Rather than taking a case study approach, we focus on the non-eminent population and use a large population-based sample with automated implementation of the diagnostic criteria to distinguish bipolars from the rest of the sample (the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) data set).
5
To see if those with and those without bipolar illness have the same occupational outcomes, we use a multinomial logit model of occupational outcomes.
Once differences in occupational outcomes are evaluated, we investigate whether bipolars are concentrated in more creative occupations based on a measure from the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles
. To test for differences in this measure for bipolars we turn to nonparametric methods, since the distribution of the occupational creativity variable is highly skewed, rendering parametric regression analysis inappropriate. Instead we estimate separate nonparametric densities for bipolar and non-bipolar individuals, and test for differences in the distributions.