Meditation is an ancient mindfulness practice that stems from Buddhist and Hindu cultures, where the practitioner intentionally engages the mind by bringing an increased awareness to thought and feeling. Many different types of meditation practices exist. For example, focused attention meditation encourages concentration on a single object such as the breath, a part of the body, or an external object, while open monitoring mediation encourages a non-judgmental and non-attached monitoring of all things coming into our conscious awareness. In parallel with the growing popularity of meditation, a growing body of studies on the behavioral and neurophysiological effects of meditation has begun to explore whether meditation can be used to improve mood, decrease stress, and affect various cognitive functions in both normal [1] and patient population groups [2].
While prominent early studies of the effects of meditation focused on patterns of electroencephalography (EEG) signals in the brains of highly experienced Tibetan Buddhist monks relative to inexperienced meditators [3], many meditation studies to date have taken either a cross-sectional approach in individuals completing intensive meditation retreats [4,5], or performed randomized controlled experiments using either experienced meditators or non-experienced meditators with various mental health issues. These studies report a range of mind/body benefits with the most common being enhanced emotional regulation, attention, and self-awareness [1]. In patients with mental health issues, meditation has shown to be affective at decreasing levels of depression, anxiety, pain, psychological stress, and substance abuse [2,6]. Other benefits reported include decreased blood pressure and inflammation, improved immune function and glucose and insulin resistance, and increased telomerase activity [[7], [8], [9]]. Less information is available on the effects of meditation practices that are both shorter in overall duration and shorter in terms of individual meditation sessions, though the data thus far suggests that shorter practices may offer some of the same cognitive and functional benefits as longer, intense meditation practices [10,11]. Here we explore a range of cognitive and physiological changes associated with brief, daily mediation practice as well as the time course of these effects.
Scientists have theorized that meditation may produce these beneficial effects by enhancing emotional regulation or the ability to control our emotional state. For example, meditation is associated with a decreased physiological response during the viewing of a stressful film [12], decreased emotional interference during the Emotional Interference Task [13], and decreased self-reported difficulty in regulating the emotional state [14]. In addition, meditation programs have been shown to reduce symptoms of anxiety, panic, and depression in patients with anxiety disorders, with these effects lasting for up to 3 years after the initial meditation intervention [15,16].
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is a major component of the endocrine system that controls our reaction to stress and is connected to a circuit of brain regions including the amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex, all of which work in tandem to regulate our behavioral and physiological response to stress [17]. Research indicates that the beneficial effects of meditation may be due to changes in this stress circuitry. For example, meditation has been shown to increase the volume of both the hippocampal and prefrontal cortical regions [18]. Moreover, mediators show decreased activation of the amygdala while viewing emotional images [19,20]. While many previous studies have reported improved functions associated with the prefrontal cortex with increased meditation (e.g., attention and working memory), many fewer studies have examined the effects on meditation of the memory functions of the hippocampus/medial temporal lobe [21]. We hypothesize that meditation will improve 1) affective state, 2) executive functions such as attention, working memory, response inhibition, and cognitive flexibility, that have been linked with the prefrontal cortex, and 3) recognition memory and behavioral pattern separation, functions that have been linked with the hippocampus. Furthermore, we predict that compared to controls, meditators will demonstrate enhanced emotional regulation in response to an acute psychosocial stressor. Importantly, and as a new addition to the literature, we examined the relationship between meditation-induced changes in the stress response and changes in both psychological state and cognitive function. We predicted that those individuals who show the greatest reductions in stress responsivity would show the largest gains in mood and cognition.
To address these questions, we randomly assigned healthy adults between the ages of 18 and 45 who did not have previous experience with mediation to either a 13-min daily guided meditation program or a 13-min daily podcast listening session for a total duration of eight weeks. Before, at the 4-week time point, and after this training, we assessed cognitive functioning via a battery of neuropsychological tasks and mood state via a battery of self-reported questionnaires. To determine how meditation affected stress level at the physiological level, baseline saliva cortisol samples were taken before the intervention, at the 4-week time point, and after the intervention. In addition, to determine how meditation affected the acute response to stress, after the eight-week program, subjects were subjected to the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST), and both behavioral measures of anxiety and cortisol levels were assessed before and after this test. We asked if and when brief daily meditation would have an effect on these cognitive and physiological functions. We discuss how the effects of our brief daily meditation intervention compare with the effects of more intense meditation regimes examined in previous studies.