Abbreviations and Acronyms
AEA
anandamide
CB1
cannabinoid receptor 1
CB2
cannabinoid receptor 2
ED
erectile dysfunction
FSH
follicle stimulating hormone
LH
luteinizing hormone
Met-AEA
methanandamide
THC
Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
Marijuana is a drug derived from the hemp plant
Cannabis sativa
or
Cannabis indica
.
1
Its main psychoactive component is THC, which is linked to altered sensual perception,
      mood changes and impaired body movement.
1
Sweeping legalization reforms in the United States in the last decade have broadly
      expanded access to marijuana, such that 8 states have legalized marijuana for recreational
      use while an additional 19 states permit marijuana for medical purposes.
2
Cannabis binds to the CB1 and CB2 G protein-coupled cannabinoid receptors, which are
      the sites of action of endogenous endocannabinoids.
3
This signaling system is involved in a broad array of functions, including energy
      homeostasis, memory, movement and pain.
4
Exocannabinoids such as cannabis plant derived THC modulate cannabinoid receptors,
      likely interfering with the balance of downstream endogenous signaling pathways.
5
Studies to date have broadly demonstrated the presence of cannabinoid receptors on
      sperm, suggesting that cannabis has the potential to disrupt sperm function.
4,6
Medical cannabis has been used as an experimental remedy with varying degrees of success
      in a large number of disorders, including dementia, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson
      disease, social anxiety disorder, depression, tobacco use disorder and neuropathic
      pain.
7
Despite its growing popularity in the recreational and medical spheres, considerable
      research is still needed to understand the potential negative effects of marijuana.
      Particularly in the area of male fertility cannabis use has been linked to reproductive
      hormone changes, altered semen parameters and reductions in libido and sexual performance.
8
A detailed review of how marijuana affects male fertility at each point along the
      fertility axis is needed for clinicians to assess the potential risks that patients
      incur when using this substance.
To examine whether cannabis alters male fertility we systematically reviewed current
      literature comparing hormone levels, semen parameters, gonadal size and sexual function
      between subjects using cannabis and noncannabis using controls.
Materials and Methods
We systematically reviewed the literature to identify relevant studies of how cannabis
      affects male fertility. We performed a PubMed®/MEDLINE® search in May 2018 using certain
      MeSH terms in combination with cannabis and in combination with marijuana, including
      cannabinoid receptors, CB1, CB2, sperm count, sperm concentration, sperm morphology,
      sperm motility, sperm energy metabolism, sperm viability, sperm fertilization capacity,
      sperm capacitation reaction, sperm acrosome reaction, follicle stimulating hormone,
      luteinizing hormone, testosterone, estrogen, testicular size, testicular weight, sexual
      drive and erectile dysfunction. These search terms were chosen to reflect the various
      points of male sexual dysfunction which may contribute to infertility. The literature
      search was limited to English publications or publications translated into English
      and databases were searched from the date of inception to May 2018.
We included animal and human studies in which primary data were gathered or retrospective
      analyses were done. Reviews, meta-analyses and unpublished material were excluded
      from analysis. Article titles and abstracts were reviewed in an unblinded manner to
      determine eligibility and relevance, and 48 selected studies were included.
Information was extracted from each study based on 1) study participant characteristics,
      including human or animal status and the previous level of cannabis exposure; 2) intervention
      type, including acute or chronic marijuana administration and prospective vs retrospective
      analysis; and 3) outcome measure type, including sperm viability, sperm motility,
      gonadal size and mating behaviors. Supplementary Appendix 1 (
https://www.jurology.com
) provides summary data on all surveyed literature regarding sperm parameters. Supplementary
      Appendix 2 (
https://www.jurology.com
) provides summary data on all surveyed literature regarding changes to the hormonal
      axis.
Cannabis Effects on Sperm Parameters
Count and Concentration
Cannabis use is strongly associated with reductions in sperm count and concentration
      in animal and human studies. Decreased epididymal sperm concentrations were observed
      in mature male rats exposed to 16 puffs per day of marijuana, comparable to the recreational
      level in humans, for 75 days.
9
This effect was replicated in a study in which 3 to 6 mg/kg of the
Cannabis sativa
derivative bhang was administered in adult male mice, which demonstrated a significantly
      depressed sperm count (p <0.05).
10
Echoing these observations in rodents, daily administration of cannabis at a rate
      of 12.5 mg/kg for 30 days in dogs was associated with complete spermatogenesis arrest.
11
Human studies have shown similar findings. In 20 chronic marijuana users who smoked
      marijuana at least 4 days per week for 6 months those who smoked 10 or more times
      per week had a significantly lower average ± SD sperm count than men who smoked 5
      to 9 marijuana cigarettes per week (26.6 ± 7.3 vs 67.9 ± 6.3 million per ml, p <0.01).
12
This suggests an inverse relationship between marijuana use and sperm count. A Danish
      cohort study on marijuana use in 1,215 participants revealed similar changes.
13
Men who reported using marijuana more than once per week had a 28% lower sperm concentration
      and a 29% lower sperm count than men who had never used marijuana. In a study in which
      16 chronic marijuana smokers were exposed to 4 weeks of high dose marijuana the time
      to a reduced sperm count was 5 to 6 weeks after initiating marijuana use.
14
In human and animal models cannabis has shown strong links to reduced sperm count
      and concentration which may be linked to arrested spermatogenesis. Future work is
      needed to elucidate causal mechanisms.
Morphology
Cannabis use also appears to induce considerable morphological changes in sperm. In
      a 1978 study Zimmerman et al treated male mice for 5 consecutive days with intraperitoneal
      injections of the marijuana components THC, cannabinoid or cannabinol.
15
On microscopy 35 days after exposure mice treated with THC and cannabinol had a significantly
      higher incidence of abnormal morphology than the control group, such as banana-shaped,
      amorphous, folded or hookless heads. In another study rats given inhaled marijuana
      demonstrated similar changes in sperm with increased detachment of sperm heads from
      tails.
9
These findings were expanded by a prospective, 1,700 unmatched case reference study
      of men in the United Kingdom presenting at a total of 14 fertility clinics.
16
Men who had used cannabis in the 3 months prior to collection of a semen sample and
      were younger than 30 years were more likely to be in the category of abnormal sperm
      morphology, defined as less than 4% normal sperm morphology (OR 1.94, 95% CI 1.05–3.60).
Despite morphological changes the research suggests that cannabis does not induce
      chromosome breakage in sperm. Generoso et al administered 50 mg/kg THC 5 times per
      week for 6 weeks in 498 male mice.
17
After mating them with females no increase was observed in fetal dominant lethal
      mutations or heritable translocations over those in controls. These findings were
      supported by a study by Berryman et al, who found no THC induced increase in pre-implantation
      loss, fetal mortality or the mutation index in fetuses fathered by male mice chronically
      dosed with THC.
18
In animal and human models evidence suggests that cannabis induces morphological
      changes in sperm while genetic material is preserved.
Motility and Energy Metabolism
The most extensive body of evidence for cannabis related alterations to sperm is for
      sperm motility. Whan et al noted spermatotoxic effects of THC by incubating sperm
      with THC at therapeutic doses, similar to concentrations shown to relieve pain or
      reduce spasticity in humans with multiple sclerosis (0.032 μM) and recreational concentrations
      (4.8 and 0.32 μM) for 3 hours, and then measuring motility by computer assisted semen
      analysis.
19
The sperm were divided into fractions of 90% with the best fertilizing potential
      and 45% with a poorer subpopulation. Compared to controls the 45% fraction showed
      28% reduced motility at 0.032 μM THC (p=0.004) and 56% reduced motility at 4.8 μM
      THC (p=0.01). The 90% fraction showed no significant difference in motility at 0.032
      μM (p=0.80) but a 28% decrease in motility at 4.8 μM (p <0.001). Therapeutic and recreational
      THC concentrations also resulted in reduced straight line velocity. A similar decrease
      in sperm motility was seen in an analysis of semen samples from 16 healthy, chronic
      marijuana users after 4 weeks of high dose marijuana.
14
Barbonetti et al elucidated the mechanism of these findings by establishing a link
      between CB1 and sperm mitochondrial activity.
20
In sperm incubated with the CB1 receptor agonist Met-AEA a significant reduction
      was observed in mitochondrial transmembrane potential. When the sperm were placed
      under glycolysis blockade, causing them to switch oxidative phosphorylation, the introduction
      of Met-AEA abolished sperm motility.
The link between cannabis and sperm mitochondrial dysfunction was furthered by Badawy
      et al, who added THC to semen and measured the oxygen concentration as a marker of
      respiration.
21
Upon the addition of THC mitochondrial respiration immediately declined and was concentration
      dependent in effect. The results were much more pronounced in washed sperm than in
      neat semen, suggesting that seminal plasma contains some protective factors.
These various investigations suggest that through the action of cannabis on the CB1
      receptor the mitochondrial activity of sperm is reduced and as a result motility is
      significantly impaired. Although Met-AEA and THC administration in the laboratory
      has helped map potential pathways, to our knowledge it is not known whether these
      effects are fully replicated in the male testes. Future testing should be done to
      explore whether mitochondrial impairment is present in the semen of chronic cannabis
      users.
Viability
Cannabis also has a detrimental effect on sperm viability. Rossato et al incubated
      semen samples with the endocannabinoid AEA at varying concentrations and found that
      viability was decreased in a dose dependent manner at supraphysiological AEA concentrations.
22
Reduced sperm viability related to cannabis has also been investigated using the highly
      specific CB1 receptor antagonist rimonabant (SR141716). Cobellis et al found that
      adding a micromolar concentration of rimonabant induced a small but significant increase
      in the number of viable spermatozoa.
23
Aquila et al reported similar findings with 1 and 10 nM concentrations of rimonabant
      increasing sperm viability with no further viability changes observed at higher concentrations.
4
While the cannabinoid system has clear links to sperm viability, future work should
      be done to confirm these findings with exogenous cannabinoids as well as in the in
      vivo setting.
Fertilization Capacity
Research suggests that the cannabinoid signaling pathway may be involved in inhibiting
      sperm capacitation and activation. Using high performance liquid chromatography Schuel
      et al observed that high levels of AEA are present in seminal plasma and in progressively
      decreasing amounts in oviductal and follicular fluid, indicating that sperm are exposed
      to progressively decreasing AEA levels along the entire fertilization path.
24,25
The authors speculated that high AEA levels maintain sperm in a quiescent state and
      the decrease in AEA levels which occurs in the fertilization environment enables sperm
      to become activated. These data suggest that increases in cannabinoid levels may interfere
      with sperm activation and may be especially pertinent in the female reproductive tract,
      which the sperm depend on for tightly regulated AEA levels to maintain proper function.
Rossato et al reported that AEA inhibits the capacitation induced acrosome reaction
      of human sperm after incubation in capacitating medium.
22
Using boar sperm Maccarrone et al found that Met-AEA reduced sperm capacitation in
      a time dependent manner.
26
They also noted that this effect was mediated by the CB1 receptor since when rimonabant,
      which blocks CB1, was added, Met-AEA produced no change in capacitation.
Schuel et al used the cannabinoid agonist AM-365 to identify concentration dependent
      stimulation and inhibition of sperm hyperactivated motility, which is a state needed
      for sperm to reach the egg surface and which assists with penetration of the zona
      pellucida.
25
In addition, they found that AM-365 administration completely inhibited the acrosomal
      modifications needed to prepare for zona pellucida binding and AM-365 decreased tight
      binding of sperm to the zona pellucida, which is needed for fertilization, by 49%
      (p <0.001). Whan et al used THC with similar results.
19
They reported that for sperm undergoing artificial induction of the acrosome reaction
      THC resulted in 57% inhibition of the acrosome reaction (p <0.001).
Current work suggests that the endocannabinoid system is intimately linked to the
      fertilization process in the male and female reproductive tracts. Given the well described
      inhibitory effects, cannabis is likely to have negative impacts on fertilizing potential.
Cannabis Effects on Reproductive Hormones
Follicle Stimulating Hormone
Relatively few studies have focused on cannabis and FSH levels, and most have observed
      no effect. Cone et al found no significant change in FSH levels in 4 healthy males
      with a history of frequent marijuana use before and after 2 marijuana cigarettes per
      day for 3 consecutive days.
27
This finding was replicated by Wenger et al, who injected THC in the third cerebral
      ventricle of adult male rats and subsequently observed no alteration in serum FSH
      levels with time.
28
Vescovi et al observed that cannabis did not alter the response of FSH to gonadotropin-releasing
      hormone in 10 male chronic marijuana users given gonadotropin-releasing hormone intravenously.
29
A depression in FSH levels was observed only by Kolodny et al, who compared plasma
      hormone levels among 11 men who used 5 to 9 marijuana cigarettes per week, 9 who used
      10 or more marijuana cigarettes per week and normal controls.
12
The group using 10 or more cigarettes per week had significantly lower FSH (p <0.01).
Based on current studies, FSH may not be affected by cannabis except perhaps in the
      limited case of heavy chronic use. Human studies to date have been limited in suggestive
      power due to the small cohort sizes, leaving considerable room for further validation
      with larger sample size investigations.
Luteinizing Hormone
In human and animal models LH is consistently lowered by cannabis.
27–30
In the single exception Kolodny et al did not observe any significant difference
      in plasma LH levels between men who smoked 5 to 9 marijuana cigarettes per week and
      men who smoked 10 or more per week.
12
However, the variation in marijuana use levels in this study may have been insufficient
      to induce LH variations.
The relationship between cannabis and LH was strengthened in a study by Wenger et
      al, who used polyclonal antibodies against CB1 and CB2 to localize individual cells
      expressing cannabinoid receptors.
31
The CB1 receptor was found in the anterior pituitary in LH secreting gonadotrophic
      cells. Wenger et al reaffirmed these results after administering AEA to wild-type
      and CB1 knockout mice, which revealed decreased LH secretion in the wild-type mice
      but unchanged LH levels in the CB1 knockout mice.
32
As is the case with FSH related investigations, understanding how cannabis impacts
      LH would be improved by larger randomized, controlled trials in human subjects.
Testosterone
The reported effect of cannabis on serum testosterone levels is widely variable across
      current studies. In an early work in 20 chronic marijuana users Kolodny et al found
      a significant reduction in testosterone levels between chronic and never marijuana
      users (p <0.001).
12
The average plasma testosterone level in the control group was 742 ± 29 ng/ml, while
      levels were 503 ± 40 and 309 ± 34 ng/ml in the 5 to 9 and the 10 or more marijuana
      cigarettes a week groups, respectively (p <0.005). Serum testosterone reduction in
      the setting of cannabis use has also been observed in several animal models.
10,32
In rats dosed acutely with THC at 10 mg/kg, a significant depression in testicular
      testosterone synthesis was observed. An even larger effect on testicular testosterone
      synthesis was observed in rats dosed chronically with THC at 2 mg/kg.
33
The evidence that cannabis depresses testosterone levels relies heavily on animal
      studies. In contrast to findings in animals, most human studies support the conclusion
      that testosterone levels are not significantly changed by cannabis use. A 1974 study
      by Mendelson et al in 27 chronic marijuana users who were administered marijuana for
      21 days showed no significant changes in plasma testosterone levels.
34
In a 1986 study of 4 male chronic marijuana users given 2 marijuana cigarettes per
      day depressed free testosterone levels were observed but the levels did not significantly
      differ from baseline.
27
In a later study free testosterone levels were compared in 41 normal controls and
      in 66 Pakistani men who smoked cannabis daily or regularly consumed cannabis tea.
35
No significant difference was observed in plasma testosterone levels between the
      cannabis users and the normal controls. Although sample size was limited in these
      early human studies, they suggest that cannabis consumption does not significantly
      alter testosterone levels.
It is only recently that large cohort studies of cannabis users have been possible.
      To date these studies have continued the trend of presenting conflicting or inconclusive
      evidence on the link between cannabis use and testosterone levels.
The first large cohort study on the effects of cannabis use was performed by Gundersen
      et al in 2015 using a registry of 1,215 Danish men undergoing compulsory medical examination
      to determine fitness for service.
13
Testosterone levels were 7% higher in self-reported marijuana smokers than in nonusers.
      This was within the same range of testosterone elevation observed in cigarette smokers
      in the cohort. The authors cautioned that the increased testosterone levels in marijuana
      users could not be separated from the effect of tobacco smoking alone.
A second major cohort study was done in 2017 by Thistle et al.
36
They used data on 1,577 American men using data from the 2011 to 2012 United States
      National Health and Nutrition Survey with several novel outcomes. No difference was
      observed in serum testosterone levels between ever and never users of marijuana. However,
      serum testosterone levels showed an inverse association with time since the last regular
      use of marijuana, and since the last marijuana use (p for trend 0.02 and <0.01, respectively).
      This indicated that recency rather than frequency of use may have the strongest relationship
      with serum testosterone levels. Additional large, population based samples are needed
      to clarify currently conflicting reported effects of cannabis on testosterone levels.
Testicular Size Changes
Current research suggests a link between cannabis and testicular atrophy, although
      this evidence relies largely on animal models. Studies in mice and rats have recorded
      significant dose dependent reductions in prostate and seminal vesicle weight.
10,37–39
A study of dogs administered daily cannabis extract (12.5 mg/kg body weight) recorded
      testicular degeneration and necrosis after only 30 days of exposure.
11
In a histological examination of the testes of mice exposed to cannabis Mandal and
      Das found fewer spermatogonia as well as basement membrane damage, scant cytoplasm
      and shrunken nuclei.
40
They also observed a reduction in seminiferous tubule diameter. Fortunately complete
      recovery of spermatogenesis and testicular cell function was seen 45 days after ceasing
      cannabis use, although testicular weight and seminiferous tubule size were not completely
      restored at that time. The authors speculated that testicular damage may be due to
      oxidative stress as a result of finding a significant decrease in antioxidant enzymes
      in affected testicles. This hypothesis was furthered by the work of Alagbonsi et al,
      who found that testicular damage induced by
Cannabis sativa
in rats was ameliorated by administering an antioxidant combination of melatonin
      and vitamin C.
41
Banerjee et al reported that cannabis has direct effects on seminiferous tubule function
      which is not mediated simply by hormone levels.
10
The seminiferous tubules express LH receptor and fatty acid amide hydrolase, which
      has a pivotal role in modulating sperm motility, capacitation and the acrosome reaction.
      Western blot of LH receptor and fatty acid amide hydrolase after low and high dose
      administration of bhang showed significant reductions in the expression of each protein
      (p <0.05).
Animal models present clear evidence of testicular atrophy after prolonged and consistent
      exposure to cannabis, an effect which is likely to be largely reversible. Current
      research indicates that this effect is at least in part due to direct damage to the
      seminiferous tubules, which may be mediated by oxidative stress. Future work is needed
      to better understand how these findings carry over into human models, particularly
      in terms of identifying the quantity and the duration of cannabis exposure which could
      produce changes equivalent to those observed in animal studies to date.
Sexual Function
Cannabis, which has been used as an aphrodisiac since ancient times, was anecdotally
      described to enhance sexual performance and enjoyment.
42
In interview data on 800 chronic cannabis users collected by Kolodny et al 83% reported
      enhanced sexual pleasure while using cannabis.
43
A recent investigation by Androvicova et al validated these results by showing that
      cannabis intoxication increased activation of the right nucleus accumbens upon presentation
      of erotic stimuli, leading the authors to conclude that cannabis may help in the treatment
      of hypoactive sexual desire.
44
In contrast to these findings, animal studies demonstrated reduced libido after acute
      and chronic cannabis administration. Using 5 mg/kg THC Murphy et al found that 30
      minutes after THC injection the percent of male rats showing copulatory behavior with
      sexually receptive females was significantly diminished.
45
Using 10 mg/kg THC Dhawan and Sharma found that after 30 consecutive days of THC
      administration male rats showed reduced copulatory and mounting behaviors without
      decreased motor activity levels overall.
46
Supporting the findings in animal models, research has also tied cannabis to sexual
      dysfunction. Aversa et al observed that of 64 men evaluated for ED complaints 78%
      with organic ED admitted to frequently smoking cannabis in contrast to only 3% with
      nonorganic ED.
47
The group demonstrated that impaired epithelium dependent vasodilation occurred more
      frequently in individuals with organic ED, leading to the conclusion that cannabis
      likely induces ED through early endothelial damage.
Strengthening the evidence that the cannabinoid system is linked to erectile capacity,
      Succu et al found that the CB1 receptor blocker rimonabant induced erection in rats
      when injected into the paraventricular nucleus.
48
Melis et al followed up on these results and reported that the mechanism is likely
      mediated by neuronal nitric oxide synthase activation by rimonabant.
49
On the whole, current research points to a paradoxical effect of cannabis on sexual
      function. While short-term libido is augmented, the ability to achieve erection appears
      to be diminished. Future research is needed to elucidate the causative effects.
Conclusions
As cannabis increasingly gains legalized status across the United States, the popularity
      and prevalence of use continue to grow. Although medically it demonstrates therapeutic
      promise in some areas such as multiple sclerosis and chronic neuropathic pain, the
      potential adverse effects remain widely under studied.
8
Because men of reproductive age are the most prevalent users of marijuana, its ability
      to impact male fertility is of special importance.
50
Current research shows that cannabis likely has negative impacts at several points
      along the male fertility pathway. Human sperm express cannabinoid receptors, suggesting
      that they are directly impacted by alterations in the balance of the endocannabinoid
      system. The effect of cannabis on testosterone levels is largely undetermined while
      LH levels appear to be lowered and FSH levels are unchanged.
The strongest evidence for the deleterious effects of cannabis on male reproductive
      capacity is its impact on semen parameters. Studies demonstrate reduced sperm count
      and concentration, morphological changes, reduced motility and viability, and decreased
      fertilizing capacity in animals and humans exposed to marijuana or cannabis derivatives.
      Furthermore, animal studies suggest that cannabis has a role in testicular atrophy.
      While cannabis may increase libido in the short term, chronic use may diminish erectile
      function in men.
The evidence presented to date largely relies on animal models, in vitro studies of
      endogenous cannabinoid compounds and retrospective analyses. The ethical and legal
      complications of an in vivo, controlled study drive the limited amount of data presented
      in human subjects, a limitation which is unlikely to abate going forward. Future studies
      should focus on gathering large cohort data in national surveys, similar to the voluntary,
      cannabis related data collection done with compulsory military fitness examinations
      in Denmark.
13
These types of studies are needed to confirm that animal models can be translated
      to human experience.
Furthermore, the mechanistic underpinnings of cannabis effects on the hormonal axis,
      libido and erectile function require greater elucidation to move beyond current associational
      studies. Special attention should be given to determining effect reversibility and
      establishing a level of cannabis use which would meaningfully decrease fertilizing
      potential. Until the links between cannabis use and male fertility become more concrete
      and well described, physicians should consider probing the degree of cannabis use
      in evaluations of male infertility and they may choose to consider possible complications
      in reproductive age individuals when evaluating the prescription of medical marijuana.
© 2019 by American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.