Microplastics (MPs) are defined as plastic particles and fibers <5 mm (Hartmann et al., 2019). MPs either are derived from fragmentation of larger plastic pieces or produced in these dimensions. MPs pollution raises concern because they can distantly transport and have been widely detected in the soil, air and water (Wang et al., 2020). Moreover, MPs have been found to be present in various foods, such as tap water, bottled water, salt, honey, seafood, and so on (Kosuth et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). To date, several studies have detected MPs in human stools (Zhang et al., 2021a). However, few studies have assessed MPs exposure in sensitive populations, including pregnant women and infants.
Studies in mammalian models have found nanopolystyrene particles could translocate from the maternal lungs, across the placenta into fetal kidney, heart, lung, liver, and brain in late-stage pregnancy (Grafmueller et al., 2015; Wick et al., 2010; Fournier et al., 2020). Furthermore, using an ex vivo placental perfusion system, nanopolystyrene particles have been observed to be able to transpire from the maternal uterine circulation into fetal circulation via the placenta (D'Errico et al., 2019). Recently, several MPs fragments (ranging from 5 to 10 μm in size), were firstly found in 4 human placentas, indicating that these MPs can reach placenta tissues (Ragusa et al., 2021). Therefore, there is increasing concern about the potential risks of MPs to embryos/fetuses during pregnancy (Aghaei et al., 2022; Jeong et al., 2022). However, it's still unknown the potential for maternal-to-fetal translocation of MPs and the deposition or accumulation in fetuses.
Besides human placenta (Ragusa et al., 2021), MPs have also been discovered in meconium, and infant stool (Schwabl et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021b), but the sources of these plastics are difficult to trace. Early life exposures may occur via the placenta, breastfeeding and infant formula, as well as from feeding bottles, plastic toys and so on (Song et al., 2021). For example, studies have shown that infant formula prepared in polypropylene (PP) bottles can release millions of MPs (Li et al., 2020). However, the relative importance of these exposure routes has not yet been established. Recently, a study quantified the concentrations of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polycarbonate (PC) MPs in three meconium and six infants collected from New York State, and found the concentration of PET in infant feces was significantly higher than those in adults feces (Zhang et al., 2021b). Considering the high exposure and to prevent the potential adverse effect, it is crucial to determine the major sources of MPs to reduce the exposure.
Therefore, in this study, for the first time, MPs were determined by laser direct infrared (LDIR)in human placenta, meconium, infant feces, breast milk and infant formula samples from the same study population. Also, to identify the potential exposure source of pregnant women and lactating infants, we collected data on the plastic use and the feeding pattern during pregnancy and in early childhood.