Review
“As I always tell my psychiatric patients, having
some
anxiety is a good thing. The key is learning to use your brain to transform the way you think about anxiety so you can tap into its secret powers. That’s why I love
Good Anxiety
so much. It offers a handy toolbox to transform your anxiety from a downer to a superpower.” -- Daniel G. Amen, MD, psychiatrist, neuroscientist, and twelve-time New York Times bestselling author of Change Your Brain, Change Your Life and Your Brain Is Always Listening
“
Good Anxiety
is a must-read for anyone interested in harnessing their full power in creativity and productivity in all areas.” -- Eve Rodsky, New York Times bestselling author of Fair Play and Find Your Unicorn Space
"Anxiety isn’t a weakness—it’s your brain telling you that it’s time for a change. And in this incredibly insightful book, Dr. Wendy Suzuki breaks down the exact whats, whys, and hows to flipping your perspective, and turning anxiety into the secret weapon you can use to get the life you want. She will transform your kryptonite into your super power!" -- Lisa Bilyeu, co-founder of Impact Theory
“Everyone feels anxious at times but "Good Anxiety" shows us that not only can we learn to live with anxiety but we can make it work for us too. Dr. Wendy Suzuki, a professor of Neural Science and Psychology at New York University, shares scientific facts in a comprehensive and relatable way. She then offers clear tools and strategies to help us live a fuller life.” -- Sharon Salzberg, author of Lovingkindness and Real Change
“A book that is erudite, practical, reader-friendly, deeply personal, and sure to help even the most anxious among us.” ―
New York Journal of Books
“Anxiety is not only useful, but essential to living in the modern world in this helpful self-guide guide.” ―
Publisher’s Weekly
“For those of us simply trying to navigate a world in which worries seem destined to multiply, [Dr.] Suzuki provides a welcome road map.” ―
The Wall Street Journal
“The book contains surveys and strategies to help people assess and even befriend their anxiety. It’s a powerful reminder that many of the human body’s adaptations can be used for good or ill — and that people can flip their responses to what can feel like inevitable feelings of anxiety and stress.” ―
The Washington Post
“Suzuki draws on decades of neuroscience, including her own research, and leavens her learning with a little personal storytelling to create a practical, science-backed guidebook for those seeking such a transformation.” ―
Wall Street Journal
“An essential guide, with tips on coping mechanisms as well as training techniques for communication and productivity for anyone who finds themselves suffering from anxiety, stress, or a case of the ‘what-ifs.’" ―
Fortune
“This book is an absolute game-changer. [Suzuki] talks about good anxiety and the idea around building a better relationship to our anxiety and using it as a way to empower us to be better… It’s a mixture of tools, of storytelling, of understanding and unpacking some of the best things we can do to help our mental health [and] anxiety.” ―
Conscious Conversations Podcast
“[Suzuki] guides nervous listeners in how to actually honor their panic, and channel it into greater self-understanding.”
―
The New York Times, on the Good Anxiety audiobook
“Suzuki details the biological underpinnings of anxiety and helps us reframe our perspective on it, so we feel empowered instead of helpless.”
―
CNN
“Dr. Wendy Suzuki challenges readers to recognize their anxieties as strengths, not weaknesses in her new book. By embracing our vulnerability, we are able to conquer the things that make us uncomfortable, and from that we are able to grow as individuals.” ―
PopSugar
“[Suzuki] explains the reasons our brains react the ways they do and why anxiety can be a secret superpower, and offers tools for a real world practice of healthier emotional regulation.” ―
Salon
“Suzuki outlines strategies to turn that sinking feeling into something productive.” ―
NPR Life Kit
"Suzuki shows readers how to identify triggers, acknowledge anxieties, and use them to promote such superpowers as resilience, compassion, creativity, and empathy... [a] reassuring book." ―
Booklist
“This book has tools in it, but it’s also a health book… because your health is in your hands. How you manage the “what-ifs” will determine in many ways your brain health, emotional health, spiritual health. [Good Anxiety] is a manual for how to take control. It’s fun, it’s creative, and it’s positive. It’s uplifting and it’s optimistic.” -- Maria Shriver ―
WAM Weekly
“[Suzuki’s] new book looks at anxiety in a whole new way and explains how we can use the gift of anxiety to improve our focus, productivity, communication skills and so much more.” ―
Live Happy Podcast
“Dr. Suzuki clarified how we can make anxiety work for us instead of controlling us. The tools she shares… are incredibly impactful and easy to implement.” ―
Glo Podcast
“[Suzuki] explains how to approach anxiety, the thoughts behind it, the tools to use to take control of your anxiety and take back your life.” ―
Align Podcast
“World-renowned neuroscientist Dr. Wendy Suzuki outlines powerful yet simple ways we can reframe our anxiety and use it to our benefit.” ―
The Model Health Show
“[Good Anxiety] helps us understand how simple but powerful shifts in mindset and tangible, practical strategies can help us transform our social anxiety, fear of performance, or fear of public speaking into positive and empowering assets.” ―
Karl Sterling Podcast
“Dr. Wendy Suzuki has found a way to unlock the potential of anxiety to be a benefit instead of a drawback and reveals that anxiety is not only essential for our survival but also a key component of our ability to live optimally. She helps us understand how simple but powerful shifts in mindset and practical strategies can help us transform our social anxiety, fear of performance, or fear of public speaking into empowering assets.” ―
The Kathryn Zox Show
“Dr. Wendy Suzuki unpacks the cutting-edge science that will help readers channel their anxiety for positive outcomes. This shift from bad to good anxiety accelerates focus and productivity, boosts performance, creates compassion, and fosters more creativity.” ―
YOU The Owner's Manual Podcast
“Dr. Suzuki takes us through the neural mechanisms of anxiety in an understandable way, and that leads into a discussion of practices the reader can undertake to quell… anxiety into something positive.” ―
Public Radio Tulsa 89.5
“[Good Anxiety] is an absolute masterclass on how to transform your relationship with anxiety and use it as a powerful tool for growth.” ―
The Adversity Advantage Podcast
“Good Anxiety discusses how we can harness the power of one of our greatest fears and transform it into unexpected gifts. [Suzuki] reminds us that we can truly be powerful within our anxiety and loosen the stigma that comes along with it.” ―
Daily Burn
“[Dr. Suzuki] has a wealth of wisdom and insight into how you can handle one of the most powerful emotions in your life, which is anxiety. And ways that you can use exercise, being outside, and breathing to control your emotions.” ―
Token CEO
Next Big Ideas Club Editor's Pick
About the Author
Dr. Wendy Suzuki is a Professor of Neural Science and Psychology in the Center for Neural Science at New York University and a celebrated international authority on neuroplasticity. She was recently named one of the ten women changing the way we see the world by
Good Housekeeping
and regularly serves as a sought-after expert for publications including
The Wall Street Journal
,
Shape
, and
Health
. Her TED talk has more than 55 million views across all major platforms and was the second most-viewed TED talk of 2018. She is the author of
Good Anxiety
and
Healthy Brain, Happy Life
.