In recent years, there has been a surge in public awareness of the importance of quality sleep for overall health and wellbeing. Results from a survey study conducted by the National Sleep Foundation indicate that at least six in ten Americans report that having a quiet, dark, and cool bedroom environment are three important elements to getting a good night's sleep [1]. To improve the bedroom environment, commercially available devices and smartphone applications purported to mask disruptive noises and improve sleep have been developed. One of the most popular applications is the so-called “white noise machine” (WNM) with at least 250 applications on Google Play for Android devices, in May 2020. WNMs are also available as stand-alone devices, including in-ear buds, similar to headphones, or external devices, similar to alarm clocks.
There are several theories for why WNMs may improve sleep. The first is that the sound emitted has sleep-promoting or wake-reducing properties that lulls the brain into sleep. There is some limited evidence that the sound of rain, for example, which is generally broadband in nature, is as effective as lullabies at facilitating sleep in children [3]. Loewy and colleagues [4] found that both lullabies and broadband sound decrease heart rate and respiratory rate and improve sleep quality among premature infants. The second theory is that white noise could “mask” the presence of other sounds that would otherwise disturb sleep. Masking is a psychoacoustic process by which the threshold for hearing one sound is raised by the presence of a masking sound [7,8]. The human auditory system remains active during sleep, and may thus react to signals perceived as relevant [9]. The probability of the body responding to a noise during sleep increases with the sound pressure level of the acoustic stimulus [∗[10], ∗[11], ∗[12]]. A reduction in the perceived loudness of noise events by partial masking might therefore result in fewer noise-induced disturbances and less fragmented sleep. A third possibility is that white noise functions as a stimulus control [13]. That is, it may act as a cue for sleep that helps individuals fall asleep quickly and maintain sleep.
Conversely, introducing a continuous noise into the bedroom environment could potentially have negative consequences. It could mask relevant sounds in the environment (e.g., a baby crying or alarm) or disrupt sleep itself. Animal studies, for example, have shown that continuous white noise exposure can perturb slow wave sleep and/or rapid eye movement sleep [14]. White noise could also induce hearing loss, if the sound is too loud. Noise-induced hearing loss is a complex mechanism that includes the accumulation of reactive oxygen species and the active stimulation of intracellular stress pathways causing cell death [15]. It is therefore conceivable that, much like the brain, the auditory system needs downtime to clear metabolic byproducts accumulated during waking hours [16]. Finally, white noise could have additional health consequences. Attarha and colleagues [17] concluded in a review of white noise therapy for tinnitus patients using white noise to mask tinnitus rather than external sounds that long-term exposure could result in changes in the functional and structural integrity of the central auditory system and brain.
The term “white noise” is frequently used to describe the general sound emitted by WNMs, AC units, fans, et cetera.
However
, the actual sound emitted may be “white noise”, “pink noise”, or “broadband noise”, each of which has different noise characteristics (see Fig. 1). White noise refers to a sound that has an equal intensity at every frequency
f
in the frequency range of human hearing (i.e., approximately 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz), and it is perceived as a “hissing” sound. Pink noise refers to sound that has an intensity of 1/
f
at each frequency
f
. The sound is lower and deeper in character since the lower frequencies are proportionally more intense than the higher frequencies. Broadband noise is an example of filtered noise so it only contains a segment of the entire auditory frequency range, and can sound higher or lower in frequency depending on the limits of the noise band. The term “continuous noise” is used in this article but the sounds described will have varying noise characteristics.
Despite increasing popularity, the efficacy of continuous noise to improve objective and subjective measures of sleep remains unclear. The aim of this study was to systematically review the evidence regarding continuous noise as a non-pharmacological approach for improving sleep among human subjects. Specifically, the review was guided by the
a priori
review question, “Does the use of so-called ‘white noise machines’ improve sleep onset latency, sleep fragmentation, sleep quality and/or decrease arousals, awakenings, and wakefulness?”