Over 16% of all full-time wage and salary workers in the United States follow schedules that fall outside conventional daytime (07:00–18:00) work hours, with over 10 million Americans working evening, night, or rotating shifts that involve nights (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Because it requires inversion of the natural, diurnal human activity-rest cycle, night work is associated with decreased alertness and some measures of performance, reduced safety, and adverse health effects (Ganesan et al., 2019, Rajaratnam et al., 2013). Working at night, especially when part of a rotating shift schedule, can also disrupt circadian system functions such as the melatonin cycle. Circadian disruption has been associated with increased risk for metabolic syndrome, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer (Khan et al., 2018, Potter et al., 2016). There are indications that the cancer risk is potentially mediated through the suppression of melatonin by exposure to light at night (LAN), with several studies concluding that women performing night-shift work had elevated risk for breast cancer (Davis et al., 2001, Hansen, 2001a, Hansen, 2001b, Schernhammer et al., 2006, Schernhammer et al., 2001, Tynes et al., 1996).
Nurses and patient care associates who work evening and night shifts are also at greater risk for work-related injuries (Trinkoff, Le, & Geiger-Brown, 2007), and that risk appears to increase when working consecutive 12-h shifts compared to shifts that are preceded by time off (Hopcia, Dennerlein, Hashimoto, Orechia, & Sorensen, 2012). A recent study of 1,744 newly licensed registered nurses found that those working overtime experienced a 32% increased risk for needle-stick injuries, and nurses working night shifts experienced a more modest (but still significant) 16% increased risk (Stimpfel, Brewer, & Kovner, 2015). Alertness is therefore especially important during evening and night work to minimize risk for accidents and promote healthcare workers’ safety, health, and well-being.
Light can serve as an important countermeasure to somnolence at night, as it is capable of eliciting an acute alerting response in humans shortly after the light exposure occurs, similar to the effect of a cup of coffee. This response has been confirmed by laboratory studies documenting elevated core body temperature, increased EEG brain activity, improved scores in certain types of performance testing, subjective and objective reports of improved alertness, and subjective reports of improved health and well-being in response to bright light at all times of day and night (Badia et al., 1991, Lowden et al., 2004, Okamoto et al., 2014, Sahin and Figueiro, 2013, Viola et al., 2008). Acute exposure to high levels of bright light (typically 100–10,000 lx at the eyes) at night has been shown to promote alertness, but because the human circadian system is maximally sensitive to short-wavelength light (as measured by acute melatonin suppression; Brainard et al., 2001, Rea et al., 2005, Thapan et al., 2001), much lower levels of 470-nm (blue) are also effective (Souman, Tinga, Te Pas, van Ee, & Vlaskamp, 2018). It is well known, however, that nighttime exposure to bright light (>2,500 lx) (Lewy, Wehr, Goodwin, & Newsome, 1980) or blue light (as low as 40 lx) (Figueiro & Rea, 2010) can suppress the body’s secretion of the hormone melatonin, thereby increasing the aforementioned health risks. Light exposures can also disrupt other key circadian processes such as the sleep/wake cycle by delaying bedtimes and wake times, feeding a vicious cycle that further exacerbates problems with health, mood, and alertness.
It has become clear, on the other hand, that light’s alerting effects are not solely linked to its ability to suppress the hormone melatonin, which is secreted by the pineal gland in darkness and signals the body that it is time for sleep. Studies have shown that light exposures can elicit alertness during the daytime, when melatonin levels are low (Phipps-Nelson et al., 2003, Vandewalle et al., 2006, Sahin et al., 2014). Consistently, research has also indicated that light’s alerting effect extends to longer wavelength light (e.g., saturated red light, peak wavelength [
λ
max
] at 630 nm) that exerts minimal influence on melatonin levels and the circadian system (Figueiro et al., 2009, Papamichael et al., 2012). These findings have potentially significant practical applications for healthcare personnel who work through the night, in that red light could help them maintain alertness without suppressing melatonin or shifting the timing of their circadian rhythms.
This ongoing crossover, mixed design (within- and between-subjects) design field study seeks to test the efficacy and acceptance of a carefully specified and administered red light exposure, delivered via personal light glasses while participants are working in healthcare settings. Our overall hypothesis is that both the red and blue lighting interventions will reduce sleepiness and improve performance outcomes compared to the control condition, but that only blue light will affect melatonin levels in night-shift workers. Because we hypothesized that no significant differences would exist between the red and blue lighting interventions, no
post hoc
comparisons between these two conditions were performed. This contribution presents only the visual performance testing and subjective-scale results for those who have completed baseline and intervention weeks for at least one of the three lighting conditions employed.