Review
"In this extraordinary volume, Allan Schore shows how the right-lateralized unconscious mind and its relationship to the left-lateralized conscious mind offer a neurobiologically-informed model of psychodynamic psychotherapy and a psychodynamic model of neuropsychoanalysis. Clinicians will especially appreciate Schore's illustrations of the changes in the patient's and therapist's unconscious right minds over the course of the treatment, beneath and beyond the verbal narratives―through the relationship itself. Through a unified theory of psychoanalysis as 'the science of the unconscious mind,' Schore shows what it means to be human. He bridges past, present, and future as well as childhood and adulthood, while simultaneously bridging neuroscience, the individual mind, and human relatedness."
―
Philip M. Bromberg, PhD, author of
The Shadow of the Tsunami: and the Growth of the Relational Mind
"In this meticulously researched and lovingly crafted masterpiece, the trailblazing, internationally renowned neuroscientist-clinician Allan Schore, Ph.D, evolves his interpersonal neurobiological paradigm of
Right Brain Psychotherapy
to the next level of nuanced refinement. In what is most certainly destined to become a classic in the field Schore celebrates the beauty and quantum power of a therapeutic dynamic that invites mutual surrender and the co-creation of precious moments of authentic meeting 'beneath the words'―once both participants dare to bring heart and soul to the ever-deepening, affectively attuned resonance between them. You would not be in your 'right mind' were you to pass up this opportunity to evolve to your own next level by immersing yourself in the magic of Schore's seamless integration of left-brain neuroscientific theory and right-brain clinical practice."
―
Martha Stark, MD, Faculty, Harvard Medical School, award-winning author of
Relentless Hope: The Refusal to Grieve
"Allan Schore is one of the leading figures in the brain-based understanding of psychotherapy today. This book is an outstanding work on the topic of the importance of the right hemisphere in attachment, in trauma, and in the establishment of the emotionally mature human individual, by its greatest theoretician. It is both humane and scientific, of practical import, and intellectually stimulating."
―
Iain McGilchrist, MA (Oxon), MB, FRCPsych, FRSA, author of
The Master and His Emissary
About the Author
Allan Schore, PhD
, is on the clinical faculty of the Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, and at the UCLA Center for Culture, Brain, and Development. He is the recipient of the American Psychological Association Division 56: Trauma Psychology "Award for Outstanding Contributions to Practice in Trauma Psychology" and APA's Division 39: Psychoanalysis "Scientific Award in Recognition of Outstanding Contributions to Research, Theory and Practice of Neuroscience and Psychoanalysis."He is also an honorary member of the American Psychoanalytic Association. He is author of nine seminal volumes, including
Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self
,
Affect Dysregulation and Disorders of the Self
, and
Affect Regulation and the Repair of the Self,
as well as numerous articles and chapters. His Regulation Theory, grounded in developmental neuroscience and developmental psychoanalysis, focuses on the origin, psychopathogenesis, and psychotherapeutic treatment of the early forming subjective implicit self. His contributions appear in multiple disciplines, including developmental neuroscience, psychiatry, psychoanalysis, developmental psychology, attachment theory, trauma studies, behavioral biology, clinical psychology, and clinical social work. His groundbreaking integration of neuroscience with attachment theory has led to his description as "the American Bowlby" and with psychoanalysis as "the world's leading expert in neuropsychoanalysis." His books have been translated into several languages, including Italian, French, German, and Turkish.