Participants were instructed to fast overnight, abstain from alcohol consumption for at least 3 days, and to keep away from smoking for at least 12 h prior to blood specimen collections. The cholesterol contents of serum lipoprotein fractions and triglycerides were measured enzymatically (Boehringer Mannheim, Germany) [
16
]. High-sensitivity serum C-reactive protein was assessed with an immunometric assay (Immulite High Sensitivity C-Reactive Protein Assay; DPC, Los Angeles, CA, USA). Participants completed a self-administered health and lifestyle questionnaire for the assessment of age, smoking, alcohol consumption, level of physical activity, SES, baseline diseases, and medication history. The energy expenditure of physical activity was assessed using the validated KIHD 12-month leisure time physical activity history questionnaire [
14
]. Adulthood SES was assessed as a combined measure of income, education, occupation, occupational prestige, material standard of living, and housing conditions, all of which were assessed with self-reported questionnaires. Values for SES ranged from 0 to 25, with a higher value indicating lower levels of SES. Alcohol consumption was assessed using the Nordic Alcohol Consumption Inventory. History of type 2 diabetes was defined as having a clinical diagnosis of diabetes and regular treatment with diet, oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin therapy, fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L, or according to self-reports. History of coronary heart disease (CHD) was based on a previous myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, the use of nitroglycerin for chest pain once a week or more frequently, or chest pain. Resting blood pressure was measured between 8 and 10 a.m. with a random zero sphygmomanometer. The weekly frequency of sauna bathing sessions, duration of sessions and temperature of the sauna room were assessed using self-administrated questionnaires. The assessment represented typical sauna bathing habits during the week. The questionnaires were checked by an experienced nurse at the time of baseline examination.