“[One of the] best books of 2017... In
The State of Affairs
, Perel explores a vast landscape of the adulterous terrain... in a way that’s deeply humane and never preachy.” —
NPR’s Guide to 2017’s Greatest Reads
“
The State of Affairs
takes a fresh look at infidelity, broadening the focus from the havoc it wreaks within a committed relationship to consider also why people do it, what it means to them, and why breaking up is the expected response to duplicity — but not necessarily the wisest one.” —
LA Review of Books
“[Perel] deals with the mess and pain of fractured relationships with searing honesty, astute observations and compassion… If your marriage were in trouble, you’d want her help.” —
Guardian
(UK)
“As someone so completely plugged into the world of relationships, it makes sense that Perel would have some incredible insight into the most important one of all: the relationship we have with ourselves.” —
Shondaland
“She doesn’t peddle in bromides or offer a shoulder to cry on — she’s too busy trying to shake you to your senses, insisting on your agency, your vitality and your complicity in what happens in your marriage.“ —
The New York Times
“Esther Perel is one of the most influential and well-known psychotherapists in the world. Through TED Talks, best-selling books, a podcast (Where Should We Begin?), and her clinical practice in New York City, she explores the one subject she believes interests every human: relationships.” —
The Cut, New York Magazine
“Sexologist Perel, a marriage crisis ‘first responder,’ excavates the messy psychology of infidelity, digging into such charged topics as the ‘new shame’ of wives—staying with a cheater—and why even happy partners sometimes stray.” —
O Magazine
, 10 Books To Pick Up Now
“In her opinion, confronting and unearthing the why behind an affair with honesty and courage, can steer a relationship back from brink—possibly towards a place of erotic rediscovery.” —
Esquire
“Relationship therapist Esther Perel is probably the world’s foremost authority on infidelity.” —
GQ, UK
“Esther Perel is America’s first clear-eyed public intellectual on love.” —
Quartz
“Esther Perel is widely recognized as the world’s leading expert on marriage.” —
Sunday Times Style by The Times of London
“
The State of Affairs
examines infidelity from all points of view – the person who cheated, the person who was cheated on, and the third party – in an attempt to understand how to make modern relationships more resilient.” —
Washington Post
“Perel is a master at what she does.” —
The New Yorker
on podcast
Where Should We Begin?
with Esther Perel
“Ms. Perel doesn’t recommend that couples be unfaithful—far from it. But she thinks that affairs can happen in stable, happy marriages, and that they often have more to do with a person than a relationship.” —
Wall Street Journal
“Perel suggests that one factor driving infidelity in otherwise happy marriages is the fact that we rely on our spouse for too much, particularly too much in our own quest for self-discovery.” —
New York Post
“The Book is sure to spark intelligent conversations that will have readers everywhere examining their belief systems… A thought-provoking take on relationships and essential reading for couples dealing with infidelity.” —
Publishers Weekly
“Unfailingly empathetic….
The State of Affairs
is packed with such sage insights…. Through her formidable elegance, Perel manages to infuse some dignity into the pettiness of most betrayals.” —
Bookforum
“Perel takes an unconventional look at infidelity.” —
Associated Press
“With a Francophone accent that sounds just as knowledgeable as it does erotic, to say Perel is easy on the ears is an understatement.” —
Vogue
on podcast
Where Should We Begin?
with Esther Perel
“Perel takes a peel-the-layers approach to infidelity that surprises on every page…. [She] weaves together a collection of personal stories that is both thrilling (you feel like you’re eavesdropping) and moving.” —
Goop
—
CNN
“If anyone knows the varied ways cheating can impact a marriage, it’s Esther Perel.” —
Health magazine
“[Perel] uses her findings to confront some of the most controversial and uncomfortable topics…. Here is a woman who, after spending three decades listening to tales of lies, pain and illicit sex, still believes in our ability to love and be loved in an honest, nuanced way.” —
RED Magazine
“
Sure to get a lot of people talking.” —
Megyn Kelly on
Megyn Kelly TODAY
“One of the most respected voices on erotic intelligence, she views sexuality as a lens through which to examine the progressive or conservative forces at work in a society.” —
The Georgia Straight
“Excellent.” —
Nasty Galaxy
, the Nasty Gal blog
“Perel uses conversation, knowledge, intuition, and creativity to make incisive interpretations that, at their most elegant, are not only helpful
but artful. Listening to these sessions is deeply provoking.” —
Slate
on podcast
Where Should We Begin?
with Esther Perel
“[Perel is] a genius in this area of understanding deep relationships.” —
Tony Robbins,
The Tony Robbins Podcast
“[Perel] is the real deal and very, very insightful…. Highly recommend [
The State of Affairs
].” —
Tim Ferriss,
The Tim Ferriss Show
“She has an incredible ability to speak the truth in a way that cuts you to the core and also makes you feel safe to explore topics we usually don’t talk about.” —
Lewis Howes,
The School of Greatness
podcast
“There’s a reason Esther Perel is the sex expert people can’t stop reading: she gets results.” —
The Leslie Roberts Show
“It’s fascinating because it makes you question your beliefs on the nature of adultery when you view it in a less one-dimensional way.” —
The Times
(UK)
“It’s the knowledge and research Perel has amassed on infidelity over the years, through her work as a couple’s therapist, that’s most compelling…. Perel is defiantly non-judgmental.” —
Telegraph (UK)
“Perel proposes a radically new way of thinking about infidelity that goes beyond the havoc it wreaks and drills down to its motives.” —
The Globe and Mail
(Canada)
“This is an addictive read. Beautifully written by
Esther Perel,
author of bestseller
Mating in Captivity
, [
The State of Affairs
] delves into the murky world, of deceit, betrayal and ultimate pain.” —
Starts at 60 (Australia)
“Perel’s well-researched book sheds light on the idea that couples not only have the ability to move past an infidelity, but they can come out stronger.” —
mindbodygreen
“Esther Perel, a well known Belgian therapist who works with couples and speaks quite a bit on infidelity, says that affairs are not merely an act of betrayal but also an expression of longing and loss.” —
Bravo TV