Review
Praise for
The Stress Prescription
“
The Stress Prescription
is an incredibly wise guide with simple, powerful advice. If you incorporate even one of these daily practices it will lower your stress and boost your emotional well-being and health.”
⁠—Arianna Huffington, founder and CEO of Thrive Global
“The perfect prescription for this moment in time and outside of time.”
—Jon Kabat-Zinn, founder of MBSR (mindfulness-based stress reduction) and author of
The Healing Power of Mindfulness
and
Mindfulness for All
“A preeminent expert sheds light on how to handle the daily hassles of life. It’s not just a manual for managing stress—it’s a toolkit for preventing it.”
—Adam Grant, #1
New York Times
bestselling author of
Think Again
“Elissa Epel reveals a welcomed truth: to master stress is not to avoid it but to move through it. With simplicity and wisdom, Epel teaches readers how to navigate stress with vibrancy, vitality, and joy.”
—Esther Perel, psychotherapist, author and host of
Where Should We Begin
“Elissa Epel is
the
authority on stress and how we can transform it for good. She is a gifted teacher and translator of the mind-body mechanisms, making them accessible and useful.”
—Daniel J. Siegel, MD,
New York Times
bestselling author of
Intraconnected
“Elissa Epel, one of our foremost stress researchers, presents a richly researched yet practical and straightforward program for abating and preventing the many deleterious impacts of stress, a modern epidemic in our daily lives. In today’s highly stressed and fractured society, this book is salve for mind and body.”
—Gabor Maté, MD, author of
The Myth of Normal
“In
The Stress Prescription
, Dr. Elissa Epel explores the deep science of how we create biological stress in our bodies by our beliefs, thoughts, and behaviors, which often unwittingly make us sick, anxious, and depressed. And she provides the antidote in a clear, step-by-step, day-by-day set of practices that will rewire your brain and body to become happier, healthier, and more stress resilient. A critical book for us all in an ever more stressful world.”
—Mark Hyman, MD, senior advisor to the Cleveland Clinic Center for Functional Medicine and author of
Young Forever
“Most of us recognize that too much stress is harmful to our brains and bodies. The question is what can we do about it?
The Stress Prescription
has answers. Dr. Elissa Epel is both a brilliant researcher and a gifted communicator, breaking down the latest science into guidance we can trust. This book is a must-read!”
—Nadine Burke, MD, MPH, Former Surgeon General of California and author of
The Deepest Well
“This is really good medicine! Wise and practical, straightforward and truly helpful to all who want to reduce stress and live with more ease,
The Stress Prescription
shows us how to thrive amidst it all.”
—Jack Kornfield, PhD, author of
A Path with Heart
“Dr. Elissa Epel's
The Stress Prescription
is for all of us. Reading it opens up the power to change the next moment from anxious to awe-inspiring, from fearful to fierce. Along the way, it delivers you to genuine possibility and potential whenever and wherever you need it most. Follow the good doctor's orders: These simple but profound, research-driven practices just might radically change your life for good.”
—Rhonda V. Magee, Professor of Law, University of San Francisco and author and teacher of
The Inner Work of Racial Justice
“Epel’s decision to make this invaluable material available in such an accessible, practical, and impactful way for the public is a gift to us all. In
The Stress Prescription
, she reveals the often invisible forces that affect all of our lives, and guides us towards a healthier, happier, and longer life. This is a must-read for our new era of challenges.”
—Richard Carmona, MD, MPH, 17th Surgeon General of the United States
“The Stress Prescription
is for everyone! Life is full of challenges and this book lays out in very practical terms how to navigate and flourish in the face of adversity. A compelling tapestry of personal stories, cutting-edge science and the ancient wisdom of contemplative traditions, Elissa Epel does a brilliant job of weaving these elements together in a highly readable guide to flourishing in the modern world.”
—Richard J. Davidson, PhD,
New York Times
bestselling author of
The Emotional Life of Your Brain
“The compassionate and insightful writing in this book, combined with its highly accessible and practical guidance, make it a very valuable resource that will be used and appreciated by many in these uncertain times.”
—Elizabeth Blackburn, PhD, Nobel laureate and
New York Times
bestselling coauthor of
The Telomere Effect
“This book offers a powerful path out of stress and overload. Written by a renowned and compassionate scientist, the reader is offered both the science and methods for transforming stress as we face a world of uncertainty and increasing vulnerability.”
—Roshi Joan Halifax, global humanitarian, founding abbot of Upaya Institute, author of
Standing on the Edge
“Elissa Epel is one of the most prominent stress scientists, with international stature. She connects research ﬁndings to what really matters to people in their everyday lives. In
The Stress Prescription,
Epel delivers practical, wise, sage, and transformative advice. The public needs this book desperately and Elissa is the only one could have written it.”
—Robert H. Lustig, MD, MSL,
New York Times
bestselling author of
The Hacking of the American Mind
“Whether it is personal crises, climate change and loss of biodiversity, or the many pains of inequality, we seem to be overpowered by the weight on our shoulders. Epel shows us that the only way forward is to discover and use the innate strength of our own shoulders, transforming the unbearable weight of stress into empowerment to live our best life.”
—Christiana Figueres, author of
The Future We Choose,
former executive secretary of the UN Convention on Climate Change, and leader of the Paris Climate Agreement
“Stressful times call for de-stressing solutions. In
The Stress Prescription
, Dr. Elissa Epel, one of our nation's scientific experts on the biology and psychology of stress, provides practical guidance on reducing stress. Her prescription is also a recommendation for connection, a reminder that each of us holds the key to a less stressful world.”
—Tom Insel, MD, former director of the National Institute of Mental Health and author of
Healing
“This deceptively simple book actually holds sophisticated and novel keys to building stress resilience, all translated for you into concepts and tools you can use today. Get it for yourself, your staff, your patients, your kids—and change the impact of stress on your life for good.”
—Cassandra Vieten, PhD, executive director, John W. Brick Mental Health Foundation, research scientist at University of California, San Diego
“Being human today is stressful. Period. While we can’t escape the realities of the times we’re in, we can find solace and practical advice through the wisdom in the pages of this book. Elissa Epel—scientist, teacher, and fellow traveler who cares deeply about humanity and the planet—is our trusted guide who shows us the difference one week can make in the rest of our lives.”
—Susan Bauer-Wu, PhD, RN, President of the Mind & Life Institute, author of
Leaves Falling Gently
“Managing today’s adversities and traumas requires deep inner wisdom. In
The Stress Prescription
Dr. Elissa Epel has captured critical elements of this wisdom, leading us to understand the many ways we can listen to our body, learn and grow from our emotions, and connect with the inner peace and compassion that we each need. This book will be of great service!”
—Tsoknyi Rinpoche, renowned Nepalese Tibetan Buddhist teacher and author,
Open Heart, Open Mind
“
The Stress Prescription
beautifully combines the rigor of science with the wisdom of reflection, to offer a powerful and transformational roadmap for how to live a happier, healthier life. The wealth of ideas and practices presented in this illuminating work has the power to transform our individual and collective lives.”
—Shauna Shapiro, PhD, author of
Good Morning, I Love You
“I love this book! Backed by solid scientific research, Elissa Epel’s engaging, user-friendly, down-to-earth style is at once practical, convincing, and motivating. This is more than just another stress-reduction book—
The Stress Prescription
makes you feel like you’ve gotten the secret keys to ease and contentment. I enthusiastically recommend it!”
—James Baraz, cofounding teacher of Spirit Rock Meditation Center and coauthor of
Awakening Joy
“Simple, brilliant, and effective: world-class scientist Elissa Epel has done it again, helping us to feel better, live longer, and enjoy a resilient happiness. With personal stories, fascinating research, and many practical suggestions, you can feel her friendly support, cheering you on toward greater ease and well-being. This comprehensive guide is that rare book which is inviting and accessible as well as deep and far-reaching. It’s grounded in its author's vast knowledge, deep personal practice, and heartfelt commitment to the welfare of others. This book is on my very short list of books someone should have if they’re stuck on a desert island for the rest of their life. Truly a gem.”
—Rick Hanson, PhD,
New York Times
bestselling author of
Resilient
“The scientific background and anecdotes from those who have gotten a handle on their stress enrich the advice. This is just what the doctor ordered.”
—Publishers Weekly
About the Author
Elissa Epel, PhD
, is a leading health psychologist who studies stress, aging, and obesity. She is the director of UCSF’s Aging, Metabolism, and Emotion Center and is associate director of its Center for Health and Community. She is a member of the National Academy of Medicine and serves on scientific advisory committees for the National Institutes of Health and the Mind & Life Institute. She has received awards from Stanford University, the Society of Behavioral Medicine, and the American Psychological Association. She is the coauthor of the
New York Times
bestseller
The Telomere Effect.