Review
“The Hormone Cure
is a breakthrough hormone guide—entertaining, persuasive, hilarious. I’ve not seen this content anywhere! Get to the root of your issues: low energy, fatigue, low sex drive, anxiety, weight gain. This book is gold.” -- Marci Shimoff, author of Love for No Reason
“The Hormone Cure
is the playbook for your mojo, your mind, and your bootie. With every chapter I thought, "So THAT's how that works." I wanted to call every girlfriend and give them the goods on how to glow...now and always” -- Danielle LaPorte, author of The Fire Starter Sessions
“Never before have I read a book and shouted, ‘Oh my God, that’s ME!’ Managing hormones is the most important issue of women my age. I don’t just want to read Sara Gottfried, I want her to be my doctor, my friend, and my sister. -- Ayelet Waldman, author of Red Hook Road and Bad Mother
“This wonderful book transforms how we approach women’s health issues, and will help you understand how to achieve hormonal equilibrium if you suffer from fatigue, depression and other endocrine-based neuropsychiatric symptoms.” -- Jay Lombard, DO, author of Balance your Brain, Balance your Life
“Dr. Sara is smart, she’s hip, and yet she’s pure Harvard! Learn how to make your hormones hum. Run, don’t walk, to buy this book—for yourself and your friends. The life you save may be your own.” -- Hyla Cass, MD, author of 8 Weeks to Vibrant Health
“A magnificent book! Every woman needs to read it, and every doctor.” -- Louann Brizendine, MD, Author, The Female Brain and The Male Brain
“Don’t accept the hormonal hell of being tired, stressed, fat, never in the mood for sex. Dr. Gottfried gives you an effective, easy-to-follow plan to balance your hormones and become lean and energetic. Stop settling, reclaim your sexy!” -- JJ Virgin, author of Six Weeks to Sleeveless and Sexy
“Occasionally a book comes along that’s perfect for its time-on topic, written with authority. Such is the book by Sara Gottfried, MD. It is a definitive integration of safe and effective approaches to the management of menopause.” -- Jeffrey Bland, PhD, author of The 20 Day Rejuvenation Diet Program
"Gottfried takes a comprehensive look at the most common physical and emotional ailments affecting women and explains why a hormone imbalance may be at their root. Her premise is simple: when a woman’s hormones are in sync, she’s a powerhouse, but when they’re out of whack, they wreak havoc on her body and mind. The book is both fun and an informative read [and] Gottfried’s take on the female body is eye-opening and empowering." ―
Spirituality and Health
"Gottfried, a beautiful Harvard Medical School graduate, board-certified gynecologist, and yoga teacher, looks like an advertisement for healthy living and convincingly pushes women to make lifestyle changes rather than immediately asking for conventional prescription drugs to treat problems such as depression. Most of her tips are solid and helpful...A valuable title." ―
Booklist
About the Author
Sara Gottfried, M.D.,
is a Harvard-educated physician and board-certified gynecologist who treats the root cause of problems, not just symptoms. A nationally-recognized yoga teacher, Gottfried teaches women how to balance their hormones naturally. She has been featured in
Yoga Journal, Glamour,
and
Cosmopolitan
magazines and in the award-winning film,
YogaWoman
.