“
Because I could handle my drinking — or so I thought — and could consume a lot of alcohol without becoming uncontrollably inebriated, I refused to see it as a problem.
”
Buzz Aldrin
(
lunar module pilot on the 1969 Apollo 11 mission
)
Simply defined, alcohol tolerance occurs when the amount of alcohol that is consumed does not change but results in less of an effect or when higher amounts of alcohol are needed to produce the same effect. Diagnostic manuals, such as the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) and
International Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD), have historically included tolerance as one of the criteria for the diagnosis of alcohol use disorder (AUD). The ICD-8 (World Health Organization, 1968) was the first edition that included alcoholism as a clinical syndrome, but it was not until 1979, with the publication of ICD-9 (World Health Organization, 1979), that consideration was specifically given to tolerance, although this criterion was not necessarily mandatory for a clinical diagnosis (i.e., “tolerance may or may not be present”). Tolerance has been included in the clinical assessment of AUD since the 3rd edition of the DSM (American Psychiatric Association, 1980). DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) includes several alcohol tolerance-related questions for AUD, such as, in the past year, have you “Had times when you ended up drinking more, or longer, than you intended?” “Spent a lot of time drinking?” and “Had to drink much more than you once did to get the effect you want? Or found that your usual number of drinks had much less effect than before?” Indeed, one could expand the construct of tolerance to be a key motivational construct in allostatic theories of addiction, in which tolerance to the rewarding effects of a drug or tolerance to the relief effects of a drug (self-medication) engage a form of misregulation, whereby subjects “chase” drug seeking to recapture the previous reinforcement but fail because of tolerance, thus driving further tolerance (Koob and Le Moal, 1997; Koob, 2021).
To this point, greater resistance to alcohol's effects is associated with a faster progression to and greater severity of AUD (Schuckit, 1994). More specifically, low sensitivity or a low response to alcohol intoxication includes subjective feelings and blunted alcohol-related hormonal and electrophysiological measures that are associated with a family history of AUD and the risk of developing alcohol dependence in humans (Schuckit, 2018). Such a low response has heritability estimates of 40–60% in humans (Schuckit, 2018). Animal studies have confirmed a low response to alcohol in some selectively bred alcohol-preferring rodents (Lumeng et al., 1982).
Nevertheless, possibly influenced by claims that tolerance is neither necessary nor sufficient for a diagnosis of AUD (e.g., Goldstein, 1983), the number of preclinical studies on alcohol tolerance has gradually decreased, whereas the number of preclinical studies on alcohol drinking has steadily increased (Fig. 1).
There are several reasons why the construct of tolerance has fallen out of neurobiological inquiry. Historically, many studies of tolerance focused on physiological processes and measures that at least superficially have apparently little relevance to the development of addiction or AUD (e.g., locomotor activity and body temperature). Moreover, tolerance appears to be necessary but not sufficient for the development of more debilitating AUD symptoms that have received greater attention and research focus, such as withdrawal, craving, relapse, or the escalation of drinking. Indeed, opponent processes and underlying neuroadaptations (e.g., glucocorticoid receptor and corticotropin-releasing factor [CRF] signaling in the extended amygdala; Vendruscolo and Koob, 2020; Vendruscolo et al., 2015; Tunstall et al., 2017) have been demonstrated to be involved in many of these important AUD constructs and symptoms and not been linked to tolerance. Following this logic, the engagement of negative reinforcement processes would be considered more of an “active” process that drives excessive drinking, whereas tolerance is considered more “passive” and simply permissive in the process by comparison. Nevertheless, there is a burgeoning reawakening of the link between neuroadaptations that are involved in driving the “dark side” of addiction and tolerance that deserve attention (Pietrzykowski and Treistman, 2008; Koob, 2020; Koob, 2021).
We argue that a specific domain of tolerance, reward or hedonic tolerance, reflects underlying neuroadaptive processes that are critically linked to underlying processes of motivational withdrawal, the “dark side” of AUD, and compulsive alcohol seeking and as such are key to understanding AUD.
In this review, we provide a conceptual framework for the neurobiology of alcohol tolerance. We then discuss functional tolerance, in which we briefly describe chronic tolerance to alcohol. We elaborate rapid tolerance to alcohol more comprehensively, including its behavioral and neurobiological aspects and the ways in which it can be modeled in laboratory animals. Our emphasis on rapid tolerance stems from its possible role as a predictor of the development of chronic tolerance (Khanna et al., 1991b; Rustay and Crabbe, 2004) and chronic cross-tolerance to other drugs (Bitrán and Kalant, 1993; Khanna et al., 1991b). Furthermore, “simplistic” experimental procedures that are used to evaluate rapid tolerance can be combined with such techniques as pharmacology, optogenetics, calcium imaging,
in vivo
electrophysiology, and designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs) to systematically investigate alcohol tolerance. Although we do not discuss dispositional tolerance that is related to an increase in alcohol metabolism, excellent reviews on this topic have been published (Kalant, 1998; Morato and Khanna, 1996; Riveros-Rosas et al., 1997; Teschke, 2018). Although we do not discuss acute tolerance or acute functional tolerance (i.e., within a single session of alcohol exposure), excellent original and review articles on functional tolerance in humans (e.g., Comley and Dry, 2020) and preclinical animal models (e.g., Kalant, 1998; Tullis et al., 1977; Parker et al., 2020) have been published. We suggest that studies of alcohol sensitivity and tolerance using classic and modern experimental techniques will provide critical information to further understand AUD.