Review
“I found this book a highly entertaining and eye-opening read, filled with amazing anecdotes of irrationality and craziness by famous recent philosophers. I knew about philosophers with extreme left-wing bias before, but I didn't know of any famous philosopher who was guilty of something close to murder. (And yet we still have the most prestigious prize in philosophy of science named after him!) Sesardić's examples seem to show that philosophers not only are not immune from irrationality but are in fact especially prone to irrationality about politics. Hopefully, his book will lead to reflection and a renewed effort among philosophers to be more fair-minded and rational.” ―Michael Huemer, professor of philosophy at the University of Colorado and author of
The Problem of Political Authority
“Sesardić’s book is a wake-up call to individuals and universities alike about the remarkably poor judgment many contemporary philosophers have exhibited about some of the most important political questions of our age. His careful, insightful analysis should be required reading for anyone wanting to understand the influence they have had on the past century’s universities and politics.” ―Andrew Irvine, professor of philosophy at the University of British Columbia and author of
Socrates on Trial
“Gripping, thoroughly researched and documented, judiciously argued, and alternately depressing and infuriating, Sesardić’s courageous book offers the astounding spectacle of some of the greatest minds of the past century―including Carnap, Einstein, Gödel, and Wittgenstein―adopting odious political views, supporting Lenin, Stalin, and Mao, for simplistic and plainly fallacious reasons. More shocking still is the story of how prominent journals, encyclopedias, and the American Philosophical Association itself have sacrificed academic integrity on the altar of political activism. Great philosophers repeatedly reveal themselves as terrible thinkers when it comes to morality and politics, plunging headlong into complex controversies without drawing elementary distinctions or differentiating degrees of good or evil.” ―Daniel Bonevac, professor of philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin
About the Author
Neven Sesardic has taught philosophy at universities in Croatia, United States, Japan, England, and Hong Kong. His most recent book is
Making Sense of Heritability
(Cambridge U. P., 2005), and he has also published articles in leading philosophy journals like
Journal of Philosophy, Ethics, Philosophy of Science,
and the
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.