Review
". . . add my name to . . . [the] infinite list of grateful people who have discovered the transformative power of your work." --
Nicole Krakora
". . . your book has been of great help . . . [it] show[ed] how to begin the internal healing I so deeply crave." --
Ruth Stephens, RN
"I have . . . read it many times and refer to various sections quite frequently . . . What a life saver you are." --
Jo Erickson
About the Author
Jon Kabat-Zinn, PhD
is internationally known for his work as a scientist, writer, and meditation teacher engaged in bringing mindfulness into the mainstream of medicine and society. He is the founding Executive Director of the Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and Society at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. He is also the founding director of its renowned Stress Reduction Clinic and Professor of Medicine emeritus at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. He teaches mindfulness and Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) in various venues around the world. He received his Ph.D. in molecular biology from MIT in 1971 in the laboratory of Nobel Laureate, Salvador Luria.
His work in the Stress Reduction Clinic was featured in Bill Moyers' PBS Special,
Healing and the Mind
and in the book of the same title, as well as on
Good Morning America
, the
Oprah Winfrey Show
, and
Oprah's Super Soul Sunday
, as well as NPR. he has contributed to a growing movement of mindfulness into mainstream institutions such as medicine, and psychology, health care and hospitals, schools, corporations, the legal profession, prisons, and professional sports.
He is the author of numerous bestselling books about mindfulness and meditation:
Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain and Illness; Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday Life; Coming to Our Senses: Healing Ourselves and the World Through Mindfulness
; and
Arriving at Your Own Door: 108 Lessons in Mindfulness
. He is also co-author, with his wife Myla, of
Everyday Blessings: The Inner Work of Mindful Parenting
; and with Williams, Teasdale, and Segal, of
The Mindful Way Through Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic Unhappiness Overall
, his books have been translated into over thirty languages.